It had been a long time in the making. Now it was almost completed, and the
slaves hacked away at the last clay remnants of the mantle.

Where other slaves were industriously rubbing its metal flanks with silver
sand it was already beginning to gleam in the sun with the silken, organic
sheen of young bronze. It was still warm, even after a week of cooling in the
casting pit.

The Arch-astronomer of Krull motioned lightly with his hand and his bearers
set the throne down in the shadow of the hull.

Like a fish, he thought. A great flying fish. And of what seas?

"It is indeed magnificent," he whispered. "A work of true art."

"Craft," said the thickset man by his side. The Arch-astronomer turned slowly
and looked up at the man's impassive face. It isn't particularly hard to look
impassive when there are two golden spheres where the eyes should be. They
glowed disconcertingly.

"Craft, indeed," said the astronomer, and smiled. "I would imagine that there
is no greater craftsman on the entire disc than you, Goldeneyes. Would I be
right?"

The craftsman paused, his naked body - naked, at least, were it not for a
toolbelt, a wrist abacus and a deep tan - tensing as he considered the
implications of this last remark. The golden eyes appeared to be looking into
some other world.

"The answer is both yes and no," he said at last. Some of the lesser
astronomers behind the throne gasped at this lack of etiquette, but the
Arch-astronomer appeared not to have noticed it.

"Continue," he said.

"There are some essential skills that I lack. Yet I am Goldeneyes Silverhand
Dactylos," said the craftsman. "I made the Metal Warriors that guard the tomb
of Pitchiu, I designed the Light Dams of the Great Nef, I built the Palace of
the Seven Deserts. And yet -" he reached up and tapped one of his eyes, which
rang faintly, "when I built the golem army for Pitchiu he loaded me down with
gold and then, so that I would create no other work to rival my work for him,
he had my eyes put out."

"Wise but cruel," said the Arch-astronomer sympathetically.

"Yah. So I learned to hear the temper of metals and to see with my fingers. I
learned how to distinguish ores by taste and smell. I made these eyes, but I
cannot make them see.

"Next I was summoned to build the Palace of the Seven Deserts, as a result of
which the Emir showered me with silver and then, not entirely to my surprise,
had my right hand cut off."

"A grave hindrance in your line of business," nodded the Arch-astronomer.

"I used some of the the silver to make myself this new hand, putting to use my
unrivalled knowledge of levers and fulcrums. It suffices. After I created the
first great Light Dam, which had a capacity of 50,000 daylight hours, the
tribal councils of the Nef loaded me down with fine silks and then hamstrung
me so that I could not escape. As a result I was put to some inconvenience to
use the silk and some bamboo to build a flying machine from which I could
launch myself from the top-most turret of my prison."

"Bringing you, by various diversions, to Krull," said the Arch-astronomer.
"And one cannot help feeling that some alternative occupation - lettuce
farming, say - would offer somewhat less of a risk of being put to death by
instalments. Why do you persist in it?"

Goldeneyes Dactylos shrugged.

"I'm good at it," he said.

The Arch-astronomer looked up again at the bronze fish, shining now like a
gong in the noontime sun.

"Such beauty," he murmured. "And unique. Come, Dactylos. Recall to me what it
was that I promised should be your reward?"

"You asked me to design a fish that would swim through the seas of space that
lie between the worlds," intoned the master craftsman. "In return for which -
in return -"

"Yes? My memory is not what it used to be," purred the Arch-astronomer,
stroking the warm bronze.

"In return," continued Dactylos, without much apparent hope, "you would set me
free, and refrain from chopping off any appendages. I require no treasure."

"Ah, yes. I recall now." The old man raised a blue-veined hand, and added, "I
lied."

There was the merest whisper of sound, and the goldeneyed man rocked on his
feet. Then he looked down at the arrowhead protruding from his chest, and
nodded wearily. A speck of blood bloomed on his lips.

There was no sound in the entire square (save for the buzzing of a few
expectant flies) as his silver hand came up, very slowly, and fingered the
arrowhead.

Dactylos grunted.

"Sloppy workmanship," he said, and toppled backwards.

The Arch-astronomer prodded the body with his toe, and sighed.

"There will be a short period of mourning, as befits a master craftsman," he
said. He watched a bluebottle alight on one golden eye and fly away puzzled...
"That would seem to be long enough," said the Arch-astronomer, and beckoned a
couple of slaves to carry the corpse away.

       Terry Pratchett
       The Colour of Magic
